While we enjoy relative freedom
in many countries around the world,
at times governments impose
bans or restrictions on the preaching work.
Brother Stephanos Demsas serves
as a special pioneer
in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
along with his wife, Leteberhan.
Their faith was tested
during many years of adversity.
What helped them champion the truth?
Their story began in what is today Eritrea.
I come from a family of nine children.
I joined the navy in 1956.
That was during the time
when Eritrea was part of Ethiopia.
My brother Gebrehiwot
asked me to come to Asmara.
He was studying the Bible
with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I was so impressed
with what he shared with me
that for the rest of my vacation,
Bible study became my priority.
In time, I was discharged from the navy
and started working in Addis Ababa,
so I was able to continue studying the Bible
and get baptized.
Leti was also doing the same.
In 1960, I was attending a nursing college.
There, a nurse shared
some interesting thoughts with me
from the Bible.
Ten other student nurses
also showed interest,
but the college threatened us with dismissal
because there was a ban
on Jehovah’s Witnesses.
When we were shown from the Bible
why true Christians are persecuted,
we renewed our determination.
Eventually, five of us were baptized.
In time, I met Stephanos,
and we were married in 1964.
Because of the ban,
the brothers were meeting in small groups.
Our trust was in Jehovah, and we made
the preaching work a matter of prayer,
confident that he would help us.
We saw evidence of this
with the underground production
of The Watchtower.
Our brothers were of modest means,
but they used what they had
to buy a hand-operated duplicating machine
which was used in our home.
After returning from our secular work,
Leti and I would get busy
making copies of The Watchtower.
We would play music
so our neighbors wouldn’t hear
the sound of the duplicator.
In 1974,
Emperor Haile Selassie was deposed.
This Communist government quickly began
a campaign called “Red Terror”
against any supposed political opposer.
Now, just having a typewriter
or a duplicating machine
could put you in prison
or even have you killed.
Picking up a paper from the street
with something printed on it
against the government
could put one’s life in danger.
It was common for people to disappear.
Sadly, my youngest brother, Eyob,
was a victim.
He disappeared on his way home
and was never seen again.
With the situation being very dangerous,
we were quite concerned
raising our daughter, Janet.
But as we fully trusted in Jehovah,
we felt his loving protection.
From time to time, sections of the city
were suddenly blockaded.
This happened one morning as a translator
was heading to our home
to deliver stencils for printing.
Urgently, he telephoned informing us
that a house-to-house search
was under way.
Our house was full of publications
along with a duplicator and typewriters!
Just after the phone call,
three soldiers
entered our compound to search.
At that moment, I prayed silently
that Jehovah would blind them.
Entering the room where the duplicator
and stacks
of freshly printed literature were,
one soldier asked, “What is all this?”
“Oh, this is a duplicator that we use
to print these Bible materials.”
Completing his search,
he went outside to the commander,
who asked him, “What did you find?”
To our utter amazement,
after seeing everything,
he answered: “Nothing!
We won’t find anything here.”
In the late 1970’s and into the early 1980’s,
another wave of vicious persecution occurred.
A number of faithful brothers
were imprisoned, tortured, and murdered.
I was taken from my workplace
because of my neutral stand
and put in prison.
When I think about living
through those difficult times,
I am reminded of Isaiah 54:17
where Jehovah promised us:
“No weapon formed against you
will have any success.”
Finally, in 1991,
a liberal government came to power.
They gave us legal recognition
and freedom of worship.
With these difficult, dangerous years
now behind us,
we were assigned to the circuit work
in Eritrea and Ethiopia.
By now, Eritrea was becoming
an independent country,
and this brought about
new challenges for the brothers.
Some young brothers were arrested
and imprisoned
because of their Christian stand.
Paul wrote at Hebrews 13:3:
“Keep in mind those in prison,
as though you were imprisoned with them.”
After enjoying the circuit work for 15 years,
we faced another change.
We were invited to serve at Bethel
as full-time commuters.
What has helped us to endure
through the ban years
and to adjust to the many changes
is our spiritual study program.
We’re in full agreement
with Jeremiah 17:7:
“Blessed is the man
who puts his trust in Jehovah.”
It also brings us much happiness
to know that our daughter, Janet,
has been serving as a regular pioneer
for 20 years now.
Each assignment has had its challenges
but many rewards and blessings.
I’m not young anymore;
I’m 77 years old.
And I’m 74 years old.
We are now serving as special pioneers.
When we think about all the changes
that we’ve been through,
we realize that the words at Isaiah 6:8:
“Here I am! Send me!”
are, not just for young people,
but for all of us.